OVERVIEW
Does money matter for schools? This controversial
topic of debate originates with the influential 1966
Coleman Report that found no connection between
how much money is spent per student and test
performance. IPR economist Kirabo Jackson leads
a study that takes a fresh approach beyond just
examining K–12 standardized test results to observing
long-term effects, such as how much students earn
as adults. Examining changes in K–12 public school
spending due to school finance reforms in 28 states,
Jackson and his colleagues find strong ties between
increased school spending and positive outcomes.

FINDINGS
Increased spending raises graduation rates and
boosts adult income. When a district’s per-pupil
spending increased by 10 percent, those exposed
to the increases across all 12 school-age years, i.e.,
those 5 years old or younger at the time of the
increase, completed more years of school—and as
adults, they earned more and were less likely to be
poor. For example, in 2012 schools spent $12,600
on average per pupil. Jackson’s findings suggest that
a permanent 10 percent spending increase—or an
increase of $1,260 per student overall—would lead to
7 percent higher wages at age 40 and a 3 percentage-
point lower likelihood of adult poverty among those
exposed to the spending increases across all 12 years
of their public school education.

Low-income students benefit most from increased
spending. On average, these students spent about six
more months in school, were 10 percentage points
more likely to graduate high school, had 13 percent
higher wages as adults, and were 6 percentage points
less likely to live in poverty. Farther out, their family
income increased by 17 percent.
It matters how the money is spent. Schools
primarily spent the extra money on instruction
and support services. When a district increased
spending by $100 due to reforms, spending on
instruction increased by about $70, and spending
on support services increased by about $40 on
average. This higher spending was associated with
lower student-to-teacher ratios, longer school years,
and increased teacher and other support salaries.
These benefits, Jackson and his colleagues explain,
might help schools attract and retain more qualified
instructors, counselors, and social workers.

The estimated benefits of increased school
spending justify the higher spending. Jackson and
his colleagues calculate an approximate cost-benefit
ratio of 1-to-2. For every additional dollar invested
in schools, there is a return on investment of $2
in additional future earnings by the student.

METHODOLOGY
The school finance reforms that began in the early 1970s
and accelerated in the 1980s caused some of the most
dramatic changes in the structure of K–12 education
spending in U.S. history, with state supreme courts
overturning property tax-based school finance systems
in 28 states between 1971 and 2010. Jackson and his
colleagues track the large spending increases that
resulted from these cases to examine if children who
were in school during or after the reforms were passed
have better outcomes than children who were too old
to be affected by the reforms. They look at educational
attainment and adult earnings to assess the impact
of the school finance reforms rather than standardized
test scores, which are not necessarily good measures
of learning or likely economic success. 

REFERENCES
Jackson, C. K., R. Johnson, and C. Persico. 2015. The
effects of school spending on educational and economic
outcomes: Evidence from school finance reforms.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(1): 157–218.